Off-center writes (#34)
GridTools/concepts: GTScript-Parallel-model.md

```python
with computation():
    with interval(...):
        if field:
            a = 1
            b = 2
        else:
            a = 2
            b = 1
```

translates to:

```python
for k in range(start, end):
    parfor ij:
        mask[i,j] = field[i,j,k]
    parfor ij:
        if mask[i,j]:
            a[i, j, k] = 1
    parfor ij:
        if mask[i,j]:
            b[i, j, k] = 2
    parfor ij:
        if not mask[i,j]:
            a[i, j, k] = 2
    parfor ij:
        if not mask[i,j]:
            b[i, j, k] = 1
```

The following cases are illegal:

```python
with computation():
    with interval(...):
        if field:
            b = a[1, 0, 0] # read with offset in 'I' from updated field 'a'
            a = 1
            c = a[0, 1, 0] # read with offset in 'J' from updated field 'a'

with computation():
    with interval(...):
        if field:
            a = 1
        else:
            b = a[1, 0, 0] # read with offset in 'I' from updated field 'a'

with computation(...):
    with interval(...):
        if field:
            a = a[0, 1, 0] # self assignment with offset (i.e. a read with offset and write)
```

## Off-center writes in `K`

> The vertical direction, `K`, is special in weather and clinate applicaitons. It is used nut just for stencil computations but also for implicit skemes and other algorthms in physical parametrization.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The vertical direction, `K`, is special in weather and climate applications. It is used not just for stencil computations but also for implicit schemes (solvers) and other algorithms in physical parameterizations.
```

> This is the reason why the vertical look is kept separate from tne horizontal IJ look in the parallel model.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is the reason why the vertical loop is kept separate from the horizontal IJ loops in the parallel model.
```

> The vertical loop can have _directions_, indicated by the iteraiton policies FORWARD, BACKWARD, or can left unspecified, intending that it could be possibly parallelized. To implement certain skemes it is natural to allow for off-center writes in the vertical direction, since the programmer can know in which order the values are accessed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The vertical loop can have _directions_, indicated by the iteraiton policies FORWARD, BACKWARD, or can be left unspecified, intending that it can potentially be parallelized. To implement certain schemes it is natural to allow for off-center writes (e.g. `field[K-1] = ...` instead of `field = ...` in the vertical direction, since the programmer can know in which order the values are accessed.
```

> There are different uses in which writing off-center can work with clear semantics: write at a location before the iteration loop reaches it (e.g., offset greater than zero in a FORWARD loop), and write at a location after the iteration loop reaches it (e.g., offset less than zero in a FORWARD loop). Both cases are valid. In the first we want to make the values visible in the same computation, in the second case we want to make the values available for subsequent computations. There are cases with conditionals in which the two cases above can be mixed up, but they are deterministic and creates no problems, even though understanding the code by the programmers can be difficult.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There are different use cases in which writing off-center can work with clear semantics: write at a K-index before the iteration loop reaches it (e.g., offset greater than zero in a FORWARD loop), and write at a location after the iteration loop reaches it (e.g., offset less than zero in a FORWARD loop). Both cases are valid. In the first we want to make the values visible in the same computation, in the second case we want to make the values available for subsequent computations. There are cases with conditionals in which the two cases above can be mixed, but they must be deterministic (no read-before-write) and the resulting code can be hard to understand.
```

Reviewer 2: About the read-before write and the "must be". The computation, according to the parallel model is always deterministic. The result could be visible in the next k-iteration or not, but it is always visible when the computation completes, which means you can use the off-center write to prepare the data for a subsequent computation. So I think the "must be" is not correct and the concern with read-before-write comment unnecessary.

    with interval(start, end):
        a[0,0,-1] = d
        b[0,0,1] = 2 * a # b will see newly updated values form d (apart from the first k level (end))

with computation(...):
    with interval(start, end):
        a[0,0,-1] = c
        b[0,0,1] = 2 * a # b will have unspecified values depending on iteration order
```

This code is translated in pseudo-code as:

```python
for k in range(start, end):
    a[i:I,j:J,k-1] = c[i:I,j:J,k]
    b[i:I,j:J,k+1] = 2 * a[i:I,j:J,k] # b contains 2 times the previous values in a before the assignment of c, since a and b are evaluated at the same k-level

for k in range(end, start):
    a[i:I,j:J,k-1] = d[i:I,j:J,k]
    b[i:I,j:J,k+1] = 2 * a[i:I,j:J,k] # b is going to contain the 2*d except for the firt iteration point, max2.

    # The third case is ambiguous and will raise a compilation error
```

### Another code sample with conditionals:

```python
with computation(FORWARD):  # Forward computation
    with interval(start, end):
        if (x < 0):
            a[0,0,-1] = 1
        else
            a[0,0,1] = 2

        b = a
```

Which translates to

```python
for k in range(start, end):
    mask[i:I, j:J] = x < 0
    parfor ij:

>         if (mask):

Reviewer 2: @havogt we had this discussion in the previous PR.
```
@havogt havogt 2 days ago Member
where x<0 in the k-1 slice!!!
I think we should disallow off-center writes in ifs on fields.

@mbianco mbianco 2 days ago Author Member
No, why? x is evaluated in the current slice...
```
I do not see the problem in this example. Could you explain (or we can talk directly if it's easier)

Author: Yes, x is evaluated at center but writing to a is off-center which means b will actually even contain either 1 or 2 or the old value of `a` I guess.

Author: Let's say we have only a single k column with 
- `mask = [-,-1,1,1,1,-1,-]` (`-` means outside of iteration range)
- `a = [a,a,a,a,a,a,a]`

Then I iterate the indices 1, 2, 3, 4
1. a = [2,a,a,a,a,a,a] (write to k-1)
2. a = [2,a,a,1,a,a,a] (write to k+1)
3. a = [2,a,a,1,1,a,a] (write to k+1)
4. a = [2,a,a,1,1,1,a] (write to k+1)
5. a = [2,a,a,1,2,1,a] (write to k-1)

So result is `b = [2,a,a,1,2,1,a]`

Reviewer 3: I think you missed the point that `b` is only updated at the current level after each iteration, so the `if (x < 0)` branch will never update `b` only `a`, and it will update it following the pattern you expose here

Author: Yes makes sense.

Author: So the result is `b=[b,a,a,1,1,1,b]`, i.e. b is 1 where x > 0 in the k-1 slice?

Author: Did I also mess up the 2 and the 1 in my example?

Author: 1. a = [1,a,a,a,a,a,a] (write to k-1)
2. a = [1,a,a,2,a,a,a] (write to k+1)
3. a = [1,a,a,2,2,a,a] (write to k+1)
4. a = [1,a,a,2,2,2,a] (write to k+1)
5. a = [1,a,a,2,1,2,a] (write to k-1)

and the result is `b=[b,a,a,2,2,2,b]` i.e. 2 if x> 0 at k-1?

Reviewer 3: If the rules I wrote in the previous comment are correct
```python
a[k] == 1 if a[k+1] < 0
a[k] == 2 if a[k-1] >= 0 and a[i,j,k+1] >= 0
a[k] == a_original[k] in any other point

b[k] == 2 if a[k-1] >=0 else a_original[k]
```
the results should be:
```python
# a
a == 1 at [0, 4, 5?] # 5 would belong here if a[6] < 0
a == 2 at [3, 5?]  # 5 would belong here if a[6] >= 0
a == orig_a at [1,2] 

a = [1, a, a, 2, 1, 1/2?, a]

# b
b == 2 at [3,4,5]
b == orig_a at [1,2]
b == orig_b at [0,6]

b = [b, a, a, 2, 2, 2, b]
```

Author: You are in a different example? Here the condition is on x.

Reviewer 3: Oh, yes, you're right, I don't know why, but I was always thinking the condition was on `a`

            a[0,0,-1] = 1
        else
            a[0,0,1] = 2 # This will be visible in the same computation

    parfor ij:
        b = a
```

> In this case `b` will contains 2 where `x<0`, otherwise the values contained in `a` before the computation started. This is true except for the first iteration point `min1`, for which `b` contains just the previous values contained in `a`.

Author: where `x<0` **in the k-1 slice**!!!

I think we should disallow off-center writes in `if`s on fields.

Reviewer 3: I agree with Hannes this kind of mix of ifs and off-center writes could lead to tricky behavior, but I don't see yet why it should be disallowed. Anyway, we need to specify completely the examples to show the potential issues. For example in this case, I would write the example in detail like

```python
# assuming computation domain = [ii:II, jj:JJ, kk:KK]  -> BTW, we should switch to this convention to avoid name clashing with the axes names

with computation(FORWARD):
    with interval(1, KK):
        if (x < 0):
            a[0,0,-1] = 1
        else:
            a[0,0,1] = 2

        b = a
```

translates to:

```python
# Parfor
for k in range(1, KK):
    parfor ij:
        mask[i, j] = (x[i, j, k] < 0)
    parfor ij:
        if mask[i,j]:
            a[i, j, k-1] = 1
        else
            a[i, j, k+1] = 2 # This will be visible in the same computation
    parfor ij:
        b[i, j, k] = a[i, j, k]

# a[i,j,k] == 1 if a[i,j,k+1] < 0
# a[i,j,k] == 2 if a[i,j,k-1] >= 0 and a[i,j,k+1] >= 0
# a[i,j,k] == a_original[i,j,k] in any other point
#
# b[i,j,k] == 2 if a[i,j,k-1] >=0 else a_original[i,j,k]

# NumPy
for k in range(1, KK):
    mask[ii:II, jj:JJ] = (x[k] < 0)
    parfor ij:
        a[ii:II, jj:JJ, k-1][mask] = 1
        a[ii:II, jj:JJ, k+1][mask] = 2
    parfor ij:
        b[ii:II, jj:JJ, k] = a[ii:II, jj:JJ, k]
```

Author: I don't think there is a semantic problem. It just gives headache. Maybe a question to @ofuhrer: do you see any cases where you have off-center writes in an if where semantics as described above makes sense?

Reviewer 2: I would not find it ambiguous even if we use the same field in the condition that we update, since the order of updates is clear. Now, this can be tricky to understand, but not as hard as the horizontal cases we discussed for long time

Reviewer 3: I'm not so sure that there is no ambiguity if you update the field in the condition. What would happen in an example like this one: 

```python
with computation(FORWARD):
    with interval(1, KK):
        if (x[0, 0, -1] < 0):
            x[0, 0, -1] += 10:
            if (x[0, 0, -1] < 0):
                a[0,0,0] = 1
        else:
            x[0, 0, -1] = 5
```
In which cases `a == 1`?

Reviewer 3: I just updated the last example to simplify it, but now I don't see any problem here anymore...

Reviewer 2: I do not see the problem here. I does not give me headache, because we are not accessing the same values concurrently. Now, if this is a problem and we could disallow off-center in conditionals, then it's fine with me.

Author: I guess it makes sense. The use case I think is advection where you have some velocity and compute where to put the particle. So actually it's exactly the case that you made, with probably the only difference that usually you would accumulate instead of writing a fixed value.

Author: So in case @ofuhrer reads this thread, forget my question, I found the answer...

Author: So I think the target use case would be something like this
```
with computation(FORWARD):
    with interval(0, KK):
        if (-1 < vel < 0):
            out[0,0,-1] += in[0,0,0]
        else if(-2 < vel < -1):
            out[0,0,-2] += in[0,0,0]
        elseif (0 < vel < 1):
            out[0,0,1] += in[0,0,0]
        etc...
```

Author: The same use-case where run-time offsets would be great...

Reviewer: I agree that the above example is _dangerous_. Reading the code intuitively completely conveys a different meaning. I currently can't think of a use-case where this would be needed, but there may be vertical solvers that have such a behavior. But honestly, very hard to understand what's going on in this piece of code!!!

There are different uses in which writing off-center can work with clear semantics: write at a location before the iteration loop reaches it (e.g., offset greater than zero in a FORWARD loop), and write at a location after the iteration loop reaches it (e.g., offset less than zero in a FORWARD loop). Both cases are valid. In the first we want to make the values visible in the same computation, in the second case we want to make the values available for subsequent computations. There are cases with conditionals in which the two cases above can be mixed up, but they are deterministic and creates no problems, even though understanding the code by the programmers can be difficult.

### Policy for off-center writes

The policy is the following:

- If iteration policy is unspecified then write off-center in the vertical direction is forbidden and raise a compile error
- If iteration policy is not PARALLEL the write off-center is allowed.

In all this discussion we assumed the fields where off-center writes were performed had been allocated with the proper sizes and index spaces to accommodate them.

<details>

> ### Simple example

Reviewer: "### Simple off-center write example"
